Decision for offering night maintenance (#162)
appuio/appuio-io-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanation/decisions/night-maintenance.adoc

= Offering Nighttime Maintenance

== Problem

Maintenance of APPUiO Cloud is currently done during daytime hours.

> Although we encourage and support our customers to deploy their applications in a highly available configuration,
> this has led to significant dissatisfaction among some customers.

Reviewer: Please keep documentation sources to one line per sentence.

```suggestion
Although we encourage and support our customers to deploy their applications in a highly available configuration, some of our customers are deploying applications that can't easily be configured in a highly available fashion.
```

Many have expressed a preference for potentially disruptive node reboots to occur after office hours.

> This presents a challenge as we have applications on APPUiO Cloud that are dependencies for other clusters maintenance,
> necessitating the maintenance schedule to remain primarily as is to avoid impacting these interdependent systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, since a lot of maintenance infrastructure is hosted on APPUiO Cloud, we can't easily move the APPUiO Cloud maintenance into the same window as most production clusters.
Finally, we don't want to introduce additional outside office hours maintenance windows, to keep the number of evenings that our on-call engineers may need to handle maintenance issues as low as possible.
```

== Proposals

> Two potential solutions have been proposed to address customer dissatisfaction while also considering the operational requirements of APPUiO Cloud:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've considered two options which provide opt-in outside office hours maintenance on APPUiO Cloud, without requiring that we move the complete maintenance to the primary maintenance window for production clusters.
```

> === Implementation of a New Node-Class for Nighttime Reboots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Define a new node class for nighttime reboots

```

Note that we don't title case our section headings.

> This solution involves creating a new node-class for APPUiO Cloud that would be designated for reboots during the night.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this approach, we'd introduce an additional node-class which would be maintained outside office hours.
```

> The machine config pool for these nodes would be paused during the day and unpaused at night to facilitate this maintenance schedule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement this, we'd enhance the https://github.com/appuio/openshift-upgrade-controller/[upgrade controller] to allow specifying custom maintenance windows for individual machine config pools.
The upgrade controller would then make sure that any machine config pools which have a custom maintenance window are paused as the maintenance starts.
Additionally, the upgrade controller would ensure that the machine config pools are unpaused as their maintenance window begins.
Most likely, we'd implement the custom window specification as an offset from the maintenance start.
```

Author: Should we include implementation details in the decission?

> This approach allows for a segment of the platform to adhere to the preferred maintenance window of our customers without disrupting the entire system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this approach, we can offer outside office hours maintenance on all APPUiO Cloud zones without having to switch the maintenance window for complete zones.
Additionally, customers can freely choose maintenance windows for each of their projects or even individual applications on the same zone.
Finally, this approach allows customers to switch between different maintenance windows without having to migrate their applications between zones.```

> === Maintenance at Night in a Second Zone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Maintenance at night in some APPUiO Cloud zones

```

> The second proposal would designate an entire APPUiO Cloud zone to be maintained at night.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WIth this approach, we'd selectively switch the maintenance window for some APPUiO Cloud zones to a time slot outside office hours.
```

> This would not only accommodate the preferences of our customers for a less disruptive maintenance window but also has the benefit of distributing more workload to this second zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would not only accommodate the preferences of our customers for a less disruptive maintenance window but might also improve the spread of workload across APPUiO Cloud zones, as customers move their applications to the zone that has their preferred maintenance window.
On the other hand, this approach would require customers to migrate their applications between zones when they want to take advantage of a different maintenance window.
```

== Decision

> After consideration of the proposals and their implications for both our operations and customer needs, we have decided to go forward with the first solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've decided to implement additional node groups for offering additional maintenance windows on APPUiO Cloud.
```

> This will allow for the implementation of the same node-class for the other APPUiO Cloud zones as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach will allow us to implement additional maintenance windows on each APPUiO Cloud zone if there's demand.
```

== Rationale

> Implementing a new node-class provides a flexible solution that addresses our customers needs without disrupting the operational need for our other workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By implementing additional maintenance windows through a new node class we provide a flexible solution that allows customers to freely switch the maintenance window for their applications without having to migrate between zones.
Additionally, we don't need to change the default maintenance window to implement this approach, and we can define a surcharge for outside office hours maintenance simply by adjusting the pricing for resources of the node class that's maintained outside office hours.
```

== Proposals

We've considered two options which provide opt-in outside office hours maintenance on APPUiO Cloud, without requiring that we move the complete maintenance to the primary maintenance window for production clusters.

=== Define a new node class for nighttime reboots

For this approach, we'd introduce an additional node-class which would be maintained outside office hours.
To implement this, we'd enhance the https://github.com/appuio/openshift-upgrade-controller/[upgrade controller] to allow specifying custom maintenance windows for individual machine config pools.
With this approach, we can offer outside office hours maintenance on all APPUiO Cloud zones without having to switch the maintenance window for complete zones.
Additionally, customers can freely choose maintenance windows for each of their projects or even individual applications on the same zone.
Finally, this approach allows customers to switch between different maintenance windows without having to migrate their applications between zones.

=== Maintenance at night in some APPUiO Cloud zones

> WIth this approach, we'd selectively switch the maintenance window for some APPUiO Cloud zones to a time slot outside office hours.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this approach, we'd selectively switch the maintenance window for some APPUiO Cloud zones to a time slot outside office hours.
```
